
--- Page 1 ---
 
          1 De gustibus est disputandum - an empirical 
investigation of the folk concept of aesthetic 
taste  
 
Penultimate draft  
Final version to appear in : Wya tt, J., Zakk ou, J. &  Zeman, D. (Eds.), Perspectives on Taste . 
Routledge.  
 
Constant Bonard  
Swiss National Science Foundation & Institut Jean Nicod, École Normale Supérieure, Paris  
orcid.org/0000 -0003 -4925 -6042  
 
Florian Cova  
Department of Philosophy, University of Geneva  
orcid.org/0000 -0001 -9360 -8290   
 
Steve Humbert -Droz1 
Department of Philosophy, University of Geneva  
orcid.org/0000 -0002 -0680 -649X  
 
Abstract  
Past research on folk aesthetics has suggested that most people are subjectivists when it 
comes to aesthetic jud gment. However, most people also make a distinction between good 
and bad aesthetic taste. To understand the extent to which these two observations conflict 
with one another, we need a better understanding of people's everyday concept of aesthetic 
taste. In  this paper, we present the results of a study in which participants drawn from a 
representative sample of the US population were asked whether they usually distinguish 
between good and bad taste, how they define them, and whether aesthetic taste can be 
improved. Those who answered positively to the first question were asked to provide their 
definition of good and bad taste, while those who answered positively to the third question 
were asked to detail by what means taste can be improved. Our results sugges t that most 
people distinguish between good and bad taste, and think taste can be improved. People's 
definitions of good and bad taste were varied, and were torn between very subjectivist 
conceptions of taste and others that lent themselves to a more objec tivist interpretation. 
Overall, our results suggest that the tension Hume observed in conceptions of aesthetic taste 
is still present today.  
 
1. Introduction: the search for folk aesthetics  
 
 
1 Authors are listed in alphabetical order.  
--- Page 2 ---
 
          2 In the past decade, experimental philosophers have been investiga ting how people think about 
aesthetics and aesthetic questions (Cova, Garcia & Liao, 2015; Cova & Réhault, 2018). A lot 
of this research has focused on whether people tend to be aesthetic objectivists  — i.e., 
whether they consider that aesthetic predicates  (such as ‘beautiful‘ or ‘ugly‘) actually refer to 
mind -independent, objective properties of objects — or at least aesthetic universalists  — i.e., 
whether they consider that aesthetic judgments are, as Kant put it, "universally valid" 
(1790/1914, p.33).  
So far, all studies seem to converge towards the following conclusion: most people 
seem to think that aesthetic properties only exist in the eyes of the beholder (Beebe et al., 
2015, 2016; Cova, 2018; Cova & Pain, 2012; Cova et al., 2019 ; Goodwin & Darley, 2008, 
2012; Murray, 2020; Rabb et al., 2020). Indeed, when presented with two people making 
contradictory aesthetic judgments, most people consider either that “both people are right” or 
that “neither is right and neither is wrong”, bec ause it makes no sense to speak of being right 
or wrong about such things. (For a methodological criticism of these studies, see Moss & Bush, 
2021).  
However, as some have pointed out (Zangwill, 2018; Goffin & Cova, 2019), the fact 
that people explicitly  reject the existence of objective, mind -independent properties doesn’t 
mean that they don’t endorse their existence at a more implicit  level. After all, one could argue 
that a lot of our aesthetic practices only make sense if we suppose that, at some level, we do 
think that there are objective aesthetic properties.  
An example of such practices would be our tendency to speak of people as having 
‘good‘ or ‘bad‘ aesthetic taste. At first sight, it seems that the most obvious way of making 
sense of this tendency is to ascribe to us the beliefs that (i) certain objects are, aesthetically 
speaking, objectively better than others and (ii) some people are better than others at detecting 
and appreciating this objective aesthetic value.  
However, this argument presuppose s that people think about aesthetic taste as an 
ability to discriminate the value of works of art. But, as we will see, ascribing such a conception 
of aesthetic taste does not go without some problems. Indeed, the notion of aesthetic taste 
raises an intere sting paradox.  
While contemporary philosophers have worked on elucidating notions such as 
knowledge, free will, or consciousness, very few have tried to provide an analysis of the notion 
of aesthetic taste that would help to shed light on our everyday use of this notion. This stands 
in contrast to the numerous studies conducted on aesthetic judgments, aesthetic experiences, 
or aesthetic properties. This is all the more  surprising given that the classical philosophical 
debate in aesthetics was c entered on taste and that, according to Schellekens, “[t]he paradox 
of taste, as found in Hume and Kant, is […] highly relevant to contemporary metaphysical 
debate within aesthetics.” (2009, p. 734)  
 
2. Some philosophical questions about aesthetic taste  
 
2.1 The paradox of taste  
Though the notions of good and bad aesthetic taste are now part of our everyday language, 
the notion of aesthetic taste has a venerable history. In Europe, the use of the term ‘taste’ in 
relation to the appreciation of works of ar t arose through the XVIth and XVIIth centuries, before 
becoming a topic of philosophical investigation in the XVIIIth century (Korsmeyer, 2013).  
--- Page 3 ---
 
          3  In the beginning, the metaphor of taste was applied to our appreciation of aesthetic 
qualities to point to (an d sometimes to explain) some of its peculiarities. The first was its 
immediacy : appreciation of works of art does not depend on prior reasoning, nor is it a 
conclusion reached through the application of explicit rules and principles. The second was its 
need for acquaintance:  in the same way one has to taste a certain kind of food to know whether 
one really likes it, one needs to experience a work of art to truly appreciate its value. Thus, 
aesthetic appreciation seems to be an immediate perception of aesthe tic qualities, in the same 
way that taste is an immediate perception of gustatory qualities.  
However, as we will see, the metaphor of taste is double -edged. We will refer to this 
as the paradox of taste (Mothersill,1989).  
On the one hand, speaking of taste  seems to emphasize the subjectivity  of aesthetic 
preferences: as for food, we each have our own taste, our own preferences. If I like spinach 
but another person does not, who am I to think that my taste is better ? This idiosyncratic 
conception of taste is  emphasized by sayings such as de gustibus, non est disputandum .  
On the other hand, as one of our five senses, taste allows us to make certain 
distinctions: between sugary and salty, or sour and bitter. A person whose sense of taste is 
well-trained and de veloped is more capable of identifying the ingredients that compose a dish. 
From this angle, the metaphor of taste seems to stress the objectivity of taste (we can be right 
or wrong in saying e.g. that an object is very salty or that it is very bitter) and  the fact that 
certain individuals’ tastes are better than those of other individuals. This idea comes out in 
Hume’s famous tale about Sancho Panza’s relatives. Their ability to detect a key tied to a 
leather thong in a barrel of wine shows their (objectiv e) superiority of judgment regarding wine 
(1757/1987, p.146).  
The paradox of taste – as well as one solution of it – was famously introduced by Hume 
in Of the Standard of Taste . At the beginning of his essay, he introduces the all -too-familiar 
subjective c onceptions of taste:  
 
All sentiment is right; because sentiment has a reference to nothing beyond itself, and is always 
real, wherever a man is conscious of it. [...] a thousand different sentiments, excited by the 
same object, are all right: Because no se ntiment represents what is really in the object. [...] 
Beauty is no quality in things themselves: It exists merely in the mind which contemplates them; 
and each mind perceives a different beauty. (1757/1987, pp.143 -4) 
 
However, just after observing that th is deeply subjectivist point of view has passed into 
common sense as a proverb, he also observes that common sense doesn’t seem ready to 
follow this line of thought down to its ultimate consequences:  
 
Whoever would assert an equality of genius and elegance  between OGILBY and MILTON, or 
BUNYAN and ADDISON, would be thought to defend no less an extravagance, than if he had 
maintained a mole -hill to be as high as TENERIFFE, or a pond as extensive as the ocean. 
Though there may be found persons, who give the pr eference to the former authors; no one 
pays attention to such a taste; and we pronounce without scruple the sentiment of these 
pretended critics to be absurd and ridiculous. The principle of the natural equality of tastes is 
then totally forgot, and while we admit it on some occasions, where the objects seem near an 
equality, it appears an extravagant paradox, or rather a palpable absurdity, where objects so 
disproportioned are compared together. (1757/1987, p.144)  
 
Thus, according to Hume, the notion of ae sthetic taste is Janus -faced, as common sense is 
torn between two ideas: on the one hand, it is tempted to think of aesthetic taste as a mere 
--- Page 4 ---
 
          4 subjective preference, while, on the other hand, it cannot but recognize that certain aesthetic 
tastes are clearly  better than others. This raises a first question: is common sense really torn 
between these two conceptions of aesthetic taste?  Or is it content to adopt a pure subjectivist 
stance according to which no taste is better than another, as previous studies in  experimental 
philosophy might suggest?  
2.2 Taste as an active ability  
Hume’s solution to the paradox of taste is to ground aesthetic properties in the abilities of ideal 
judges . Judgments of aesthetic taste can thus be said to be subjective – in the sense that they 
are mind -dependent, as their correctness is determined by the taste of these judges – as well 
as objective – in the sense that the ideal judges have the ‘correct’ opinion on these mind -
dependent properties. To use Hume’s own words:  
 
[A pers on of good taste possesses a] strong sense, united to delicate sentiment, improved by 
practice, perfected by comparison, and cleared of all prejudice (1757/1987, p. 150).  
 
A central idea of Hume is that the ideal judge is free from her bias, though her tas te 
remains a passive trait, similar to sense perception. As Noël Carroll puts it:  
 
Hume portrays the aesthetic response as a passive response to the artwork […] In "Of the 
Standard of Taste," the notion that the aesthetic response is a simple causal effect – a 
sentiment consequent to a stimulus – predominates. (1984, p.186)  
 
Edmund Burke, by contrast, insists on the active abilities that good taste requires. He 
also diverges from Hume – as well as Hutcheson (1727/2008) – by understanding taste to be 
a kind of judgment  as opposed to a distinct faculty of the mind:  
 
I cannot help taking notice of an opinion which many persons entertain, as if the Taste were a 
separate faculty of the mind, and distinct from the judgment and imagination; a species of 
instinct by which we are struck naturally, and at the first glance, without any previous reasoning 
with the excellencies, or the defects of a composition. […] It is known that the Taste (whatever 
it is) is improved exactly as we improve our judgment, by extendi ng our knowledge, by a steady 
attention to our object, and by frequent exercise . (1757/1998, p.25, our emphasis)  
 
This raises a second question: does common sense think of taste as a passive or as 
an active ability?  
 
2.3 Judgments of taste and of the agree able 
Of course, no historical survey of philosophers’ views on aesthetic taste would be complete 
without mentioning Kant’s account. A key distinction in Kant’s conception of aesthetic taste is 
that judgments of taste (“Roses in general are beautiful”, 1790 /1914, p.61) contrast sharply 
with mere judgments of the agreeable (“The rose is agreeable (to smell)”, 1790/1914 , p.62). 
Indeed, the judgment of taste is a “logical judgement based on an aesthetical one” (1790/1914, 
p.61, see also Ginsborg, 2019, §2.1). A s an argument in favor of this distinction, Kant points 
out that we tend to claim universal validity for our aesthetic judgments (i.e. others should  share 
our judgments), while we are happy to embrace diversity and relativity when it comes to 
judgments abo ut what is agreeable. The distinction is also based on the idea that aesthetic 
--- Page 5 ---
 
          5 judgments, unlike judgments of the agreeable, don’t involve a desire for the object. This raises 
a third question: when it comes to distinguishing good from bad taste, does comm on sense 
treat judgments about beauty and art differently from judgments of the agreeable?  
 
2.4 Bourdieu’s high taste  
Finally, let’s end this historical tour with ideas that are not often taken into account in analytical 
aesthetics but are relevant to our study: Pierre Bourdieu’s sociological hypotheses on taste. 
In Distinction (1979/1984), Bourdieu observes that what is considered to be of good taste 
usually coincides with the taste of the dominant class. According to him, the reason is because 
“culture an d aesthetics are used [structurally, but non -intentionally] by the dominant class as 
one of the means to naturalise (and thus perpetuate) their superiority in relation to the 
dominated class” (Lizardo, 2014, p.336).  
Moreover, for Bourdieu, ‘high’ aestheti c taste does not consist only in appreciating the 
‘right’ objects, but also in appreciating them in the ‘right’ way: good aesthetic taste requires a 
particular aesthetic outlook, a ‘disinterested’ contemplation that makes one able to appreciate 
the aesthet ic value of an object without reference to other kinds of satisfaction, such as moral 
satisfaction.  
Thus, both the kind of things we love and how we love them signal our socio -economic 
status while justifying it. Given the success of Bourdieu’s ideas, we w onder whether people 
might have developed a conception of aesthetic taste that serves as a socio -economic marker. 
This raises a fourth question: do people define good aesthetic taste by referring to what it 
signals about people themselves, rather than the objects of their enjoyment?  
 
Such are the questions raised by past philosophical discussions of the notion of 
aesthetic taste. Of course, some of these discussions are rooted in everyday concepts of 
aesthetic taste from three centuries ago, and one may per haps consider that common opinion 
has changed since then. For example, it could be that the contemporary concept of aesthetic 
taste is more subjectivist than the one that was common during the Enlightenment. Or maybe 
people’s opinions have been influenced by postmodern philosophy. Either way, these 
questions only stress that we still have much to learn and understand about the folk concept 
of aesthetic taste. In this paper, we present and discuss the results of a first study aiming at 
probing people’s conce ptions of good and bad aesthetic taste.  
3. Materials and Methods  
 
Participants were redirected to an online questionnaire. After filling out an online consent form 
and answering a question about how much of a potential £100 bonus they were willing to give 
to a list of several charities, they were presented with the following question:  
 
(Taste_Possibility) When we speak of people’s preferences about works of art (such 
as novels, paintings, music, songs, movies, TV shows, etc.), we sometimes make a 
difference  between people who have “good taste” and those who have “bad taste”.  
Has it ever happened to you to say or think that a certain person had better taste than 
another one in this sense? (YES/NO)  
 
Participants who answered NO were then presented with the following open -ended question:  
--- Page 6 ---
 
          6  
(NoTaste_Justification) Please, explain why you never say or think this sort of 
things.  
 
Participants who answered YES were presented with the four following open -ended questions:  
 
(GoodTaste_Def) What do you mean when you say that someone has good taste? 
Please, explain in a few sentences.  
 
(BadTaste_Def) What do you mean when you say that someone has bad taste? 
Please, explain in a few sentences.  
 
(GoodTaste_Example) Can you think of a person who, according to you, has  good 
taste? Describe in a few sentences why you think this person has good taste.  
 
(BadTaste_Example) Can you think of a person who, according to you, has bad (or 
poor) taste? Describe in a few sentences why you think this person has poor taste.  
 
After th at, we sought to explore in more detail participants’ conceptions of good and bad taste 
by asking them about particular domains. Half of the participants received the following 
question:  
 
(Domains_v1) For each of the following domains, indicate whether (ac cording to you), 
it makes sense to say someone has good or bad tastes in this domain:  (on a scale 
from -3 = “No sense at all” to 3 = “Completely sense”)  
 
The other half received the following question:  
 
(Domains_v2) For each of the following domains, indic ate whether (according to you), 
it makes sense to distinguish between good or bad tastes in this domain:  (on a scale 
from -3 = “No sense at all” to 3 = “Completely sense”)  
 
In both cases, the full list of domains was: beer, car races, clothing, comic books , food, graphic 
design, interior design, jewelry, literature, marijuana, movies, music, paintings, sculpture, 
sports, TV shows, videogames, wine, and wrestling.  
 After that, participants were once again presented with the same list of domains and 
asked:  
 
(Importance) For each of the following domains, indicate to which extent it is important 
to have good taste in this domain according to you:  (on a scale from 0 = “Not important 
at all” to 6 = “Extremely important”)2 
 
 
2 Throughout the study, we use scales ranging from -3 to 3 when answers can be interpreted as 
representing the participant’s attitudes towards a certain proposition (against / in between / in favour), 
and scales r anging from 0 to 6 when participants are asked to estimate a certain quantity for which 
negative values would not make sense (e.g. importance or knowledge).  
--- Page 7 ---
 
          7 Then participants were asked the following question about the possibility of improving one’s 
taste:  
 
(Improve_Question) Do you think people can improve their taste relative to fine arts 
(e.g. music, paintings, literature, cinema)?  (YES/NO)  
 
Participants who answered YES were presented wit h the following open -ended question:  
 
(Improve_Possible) How can people improve their taste? Explain in a few sentences.  
 
Participants who answered NO were presented with the following open -ended question:  
 
(Improve_Impossible) Why can't people improve th eir taste? Explain in a few 
sentences.  
 
Finally, to better investigate participants’ conceptions of a person with good taste, they were 
asked to rate their agreement with eight statements about the kinds of things a person who 
has good taste would like (on  a 7-point scale ranging from “Strongly disagree” to “Strongly 
agree”).  
At the end of the questionnaire, participants were asked a series of questions about 
themselves. Some of them (such as those about participants’ tendency to experience various 
positive  emotions, and the kinds of charities they usually give money to) were collected for 
other purposes and are not relevant for the current study. Others were more directly relevant. 
First, we asked participants to rate how knowledgeable they were in each of the 19 domains 
presented in the (Domains) and (Importance) questions (on a scale from 0 = “Not 
knowledgeable at all” to 6 = “Very knowledgeable”). Second, we asked participants to rate 
how often they went (i) to the museum, (ii) to art exhibitions, (iii) t o classical music concerts, 
(iv) to popular music concerts, and (v) to the cinema (on a 5 -point scale from “Daily” to 
“Never”).  
We also asked participants about their age, gender, native language, current country 
of residence, country of birth, job, study level, and political orientation. Participants who were 
still students were asked to provide their parents' highest education level. Participants' 
education level and/or their parent's education level served as a proxy for socio -economic 
status.  
All materi als and data can be found at osf.io/ckx2z/   
4. Participants  
 
A representative sample of the US population was collected through Prolific Academic. 
Participants were paid £2.38 for their participation. In total, 297 participants completed our 
survey. After exclusion based on 4 attention checks, we were left with 241 participants (124 
identified as men, 114 as women, and 3 as ‘other’; Mage = 44.92, SD age = 16.12).  
 
5. Folk conceptions of aesthetic taste  
 
--- Page 8 ---
 
          8 To our first question (Taste_Possibility: Has it ever happened to you to say or think that a 
certain person had better taste than another one in this sense? ), 224 participants (93%) 
answered ‘YES’ and 17 participants (7%) answered ‘NO’. Thus, a crushing ma jority of 
participants acknowledged having already said or thought that one person had better aesthetic 
taste than another.  
 The 224 participants who answered YES were then asked to provide a definition of 
good taste (GoodTaste_Def) and a definition of bad  taste (BadTaste_Def). To analyze their 
answers, all three authors went through participants’ open -ended answers and, on the basis 
of this survey, created general categories in which participants’ answers fell. These categories, 
along with examples of part icipants’ answers falling in these categories, are presented in Table 
1 for definitions of good taste, and in Table 2 for definitions of bad taste.  
 
5.1. Participants’ definitions of good taste  
 
Category  Definition of good taste  Examples of 
participants’ answers  % (N)  
RELATIVISM  Participant stresses that the 
notions ‘good’ and ‘bad’ tastes 
are relative, or that it depends 
on the person, or that it’s all 
‘subjective’.  “Good taste is a relative 
term.  It means that a 
particular work of art 
appeals to an individual for 
one reason or another.  It 
also means that the same 
work of art may not appeal 
to a different observer.”  08.5%  
(19) 
Agreement  41.1%  
(92) 
SUBJECTIVISM  A person who has good taste is 
a person who likes the kinds of 
things the participant likes.  “Normally when I describe 
things of being of good 
taste or bad taste, I really 
just mean to say that those 
who have good taste like 
the things that I like in a 
joking manner. Taste is 
subjective and judging 
whether or not someone 
has good or bad taste runs 
the risk of classism.”  25.0%  
(56) 
CONSENSUS  A person who has good taste is 
a person whose preferences 
are shared or approved by most 
people, or a person who likes 
things that have stood the test 
of time.  “Someone with good taste 
is someone with a 
culturally and societally 
good taste. Means that if 
you say the Office is good, 
most people would agree. 
Since it is expected from a 
lot of people.”  14.7%  
(33) 
--- Page 9 ---
 
          9 EXPERTS  A person who has good taste is 
a person whose preferences 
are in accordance with the 
verdict of experts.  “They like something that 
is usually critically 
acclaimed. It may be seen 
as intelligent or very 
insightful.”  01.3%  
(3) 
CHOOSER  A person who has good taste is 
able to choose and guess what 
will please other people.  “Someone that can 
appreciate the things that 
can bring happiness to 
other people that people 
without good taste cannot 
see.”  06.7%  
(15) 
TREND -
SETTERS  A person who has good taste is 
a person whose taste sets 
trends or is imitated by others.  “When I think of someone 
who has good taste, I think 
of someone who is trendy, 
and most people would 
admire them for their good 
taste.  I think they would 
take pride in their 
appearance and their 
surroundings.  They just 
look good overall.  
Trendsetters.”  
 00.8%  
(2) 
Taster’s non -aesthetic dispositions and virtues  19.6%  
(44) 
REASONABLEN
ESS A person who has good taste is 
a person whose tastes are 
reasonable, understandable.  “When I say someone has 
good taste I mean that 
generally the person is not 
overly brash or overly 
timid. Someone with good 
taste values things on a 
logical and emotional 
level. People with good 
taste don't try to show off 
or simply follow trends.”  04.5%  
(10) 
JUSTIFICATION  A person who has good taste is 
able to explain and justify their 
taste OR is a person whose 
taste is the product of reflection 
on their own tastes, and not a 
passively acquired disposition.  “If someone has good 
tastes, they can explain 
why they like something 
and be able to defend their 
position.”  
 
 06.7%  
(15) 
OPENNESS  A person who has good taste is 
a person who is able to 
appreciate a wide variety of 
things, or who has been 
exposed to a wide variety of 
things.  “Someone who has an eye 
for different arts, music, 
and elements of life. 
Those who choose to try 
new arts out, and branch 
their tastes into new 04.5%  
(10) 
--- Page 10 ---
 
          10 places.”  
BACKGROUND 
KNOWLEDGE  A person who has good taste is 
a person who has enough 
background knowledge (e.g. 
academic or historical 
knowledge) about the works of 
art and their creators.  “This person has a sense 
of high culture, a refined 
aesthetic sensibility, an 
acquired taste. Good taste 
is typically something that 
has to be earned through 
study at a university or 
college. There is usually 
depth and intelligence in 
good taste.”  04.0%  
(9) 
INDEPENDENT 
MIND  The taste of a person with good 
taste is really their own  and not 
the result of mere conformism.  “It means that their taste is 
distinguished and different 
from the masses. They 
think and express 
themselves outside of the 
box” 04.5%  
(10) 
Detection of aesthetic or aesthetically relevant properties  29.9%  
(67) 
DISTINCTION  A person who has good taste is 
able to distinguish good art from 
bad art, what is appealing from 
what is not, quality over 
quantity. This is a person who 
likes works that have positive 
aesthetic values.  “People who have good 
taste have more refined 
senses. Their sense of 
aesthetic is more mature. 
They pick up on the more 
subtler beauty in the 
world.”  25.9%  
(58) 
DEPTH  A person who has good taste is 
able to perceive properties of 
works of art that are not 
perceptible at first sight. They 
are able to pay attention to 
small details. They do not stop 
at the surface of works of art, 
but are able to perceive their 
depth . “Good taste is being able 
to take in multiple aspects 
of a work, including history 
as well as aesthetic and 
appreciate something as a 
whole even if it's not 
immediately beautiful”  
 
 05.8%  
(13) 
Non-aesthetic properties of works of art  13.4%  
(30) 
GENTLE  A person who has good taste 
does not like things that are 
harmful, immoral or offensive.  “I think it means that 
people chose to do or see 
or say or dress or 
participate in a way that is 
morally good and not 05.4%  
(12) 
--- Page 11 ---
 
          11 offensive to other people. 
They don't like  things that 
are garish. They respect 
other people and interact 
with them as they would 
want others to interact with 
them. They are not 
exhibitionists.”  
INTELLECTUAL  A person who has good taste 
likes educational works of art, or 
works of art with high 
intellectual value, rather than 
dumb, non -intellectual stuff.  “Liking shows that have an 
involved plot to them or 
are dispensing 
educational information. 
Murder mysteries, 
detective shows, and 
some superhero shows 
are good examples of the 
former. Documentaries 
about geology, history, 
and animals are examples 
of the latter.”  04.9%  
(11) 
EXPENSIVE  A person who has good taste 
likes expensive things, luxury 
goods.  “A person who has a good 
taste is a person who likes 
nice and expensive stuff. 
For example, he/she likes 
"Rolex" watch, that's mean 
he/she has a good taste in 
watch particularly. Another 
example, he/she likes 
expensive painting like 
"Picasso" for art.”  03.1%  
(7) 
Others (agent -based)  18.3%  
(41) 
DESIGNER  A person who has good taste is 
a person able to compose 
beautiful things or to match 
things together (clothes, 
decoration, etc.)  “Obviously having "good 
taste" is subjective to a 
certain degree. But for 
example, to me having 
good taste when referring 
to clothing means that  an 
individual knows how to 
properly mix and match 
articles of clothing in a way 
that is visually appealing.”  10.7%  
(24) 
PLEASANT  A person who has good taste is 
pleasant to be around, either 
because they are not rude, 
immodest, loud or wear kitsch 
or garish clothes.  “I tend to assume 
someone has good taste if 
they present themselves in 
a pleasant and coherent 
manner, if they speak with 
good vocabulary, if their 
jokes are clever, if they are 07.6%  
(17) 
--- Page 12 ---
 
          12 pleasant to look at and to 
listen to.”  
Table 1. Participants’ definitions of good taste. First column indicates the name of the 
category. Second column gives the category’s definition, as used by coders. Third column 
gives an example of participants' answers corresponding to this category. Four th column gives 
the % of participants’ answers falling into this category (as well as the raw number of 
participants who gave this answer). Bold, italicized text indicates higher -order categories.  
 
After categories for participants’ definitions of good tas te were created, two coders (FC and 
SHD) independently went through participants’ answers and indicated for each answer into 
which categories the answer fell. The same answer could fall into several categories. Inter -
rater agreement was good (Cohen’s kappa  = 0.64 [0.59, 0.68]). Remaining disagreements 
were settled by a third coder (CB). Final results are presented in Table 1 (rightmost column) 
and Figure 1.  
5.2. Participants’ definitions of bad taste  
Participants’ definitions of bad taste were analyzed foll owing the same method as their 
definitions of good taste. After categories were created (see Table 2), two coders (FC and CB) 
independently went through participants’ answers and indicated for each answer in which 
categories this answer fell. Inter -rater a greement was good (Cohen’s kappa = 0.70 [0.67, 
0.74]). Remaining disagreements were settled by a third coder (SHD). Final results are 
presented in Table 2 (rightmost column).  
 
 
Category  Definition of bad taste  Example  % (N)  
RELATIVISM  Participant stresses the fact that 
‘good’ and ‘bad’ tastes are 
relative notions, or that it 
depends on the person, or that 
it’s all ‘subjective’.  “Nowadays is only a joke 
to people who likes things 
that I personally don't like 
or dislike. In the past I 
would mean it, but after 
time and experience, I 
have learned taste is a 
subjective aspect in the 
human nature.”  06.3%  
(14) 
Agreement  34.8%  
(78) 
SUBJECTIVISM  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things the 
participant doesn’t like.  “When I say someone has 
bad taste I usually am just 
referring to when we 
disagree on something or 
they don’t value something 
the same amount as I do.”  
 20.1%  
(45) 
--- Page 13 ---
 
          13 DISSENSUS  A person who has bad taste is 
either a person who has 
preferences that are not shared 
by most people or a person who 
has preferences of which most 
people disapprove.  “If majority of people think 
what they think is good is 
bad then it usually means 
they have bad taste 
compared to everyone.”  
 15.2%  
(34) 
OUT -OF-
FASHION  A person who has bad taste is a 
person whose taste is outdated 
or is not in line with current 
trends.  “A person has bad taste 
when they don't follow 
current trends. They are 
unable to think outside the 
box and refuse to see 
things from different points 
of view. They get stuck in 
one th ing and end up 
getting left behind.”  02.7%  
(6) 
Taster’s non -aesthetic dispositions and virtues  17.4% 
(39) 
ALIEN  A person who has bad taste is a 
person whose tastes are weird, 
hard to understand, 
unreasonable.  “It would make me think 
about what is going on in 
their head. I would think 
less of them because 
apparently, we think 
differently.”  
 03.6%  
(8) 
LACK OF 
JUSTIFICATION  A person who has bad taste is 
unable to explain or justify their 
tastes OR is a person whose 
tastes are not the product of 
active reflection on their behalf, 
but are rather the product of a 
passively acquired disposition.  “If someone has bad 
tastes they are unable to 
explain why they like 
something and can not 
defend their position.”  
 03.6%  
(8) 
NARROW -
MINDED  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who never tries new 
things, who prefers to stick to 
the same kinds and genres of 
works of art.  “When someone has bad 
taste this person has yet to 
try many things in life. 
They solely stick to a 
couple of choices in their 
food, clo thing etc. For 
example a person eats 
McDonalds shows he/she 
hasn't tried something 
better.”  04.0%  
(9) 
NO 
BACKGROUND 
KNOWLEDGE  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who has not enough 
background knowledge (e.g. 
academic or historical “They do not understand 
the creation. They are not 
educated enough to 
appreciate what it is or 
means.”  
 02.2%  
(5) 
--- Page 14 ---
 
          14 knowledge) about the works of 
art and their creators.  
FOLLOWER  A person who has bad taste is a 
person whose taste is not really 
their own , but the mere result  of 
blind conformism.  “I'd say someone with a 
"bad taste" doesn't really 
like things on their own, 
they tend to be a follower 
for what's popular so they 
don't end up with much of 
a taste at all. I'd also say 
it's when they like a lot of 
things that other p eople 
tend to dislike, so they'd 
have a "bad taste" 
compared. Again though, 
really depends on cultures 
and areas they grew up, 
what may be bad tastes 
where they are, could be 
good tastes elsewhere.”  05.8%  
(13) 
Detection of aesthetic and aesthetically relevant properties  39.7%  
(87) 
NO VALUE  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things that 
have no aesthetic values  or 
negative aesthetic values  OR is 
unable to make the distinction 
between things that have 
aesthetic values and those that 
don’t.  “They don’t or can’t 
appreciate the beauty and 
quality of fine art or food, 
etc. Bad taste usually 
means that the person 
enjoys something of a 
lesser qual ity.” 
 29.0%  
(65) 
GAUDY  
(subcategory of 
NO VALUE)  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things that are 
gaudy, flashy, attention -getting, 
pompous, ostentatious, tacky 
(or has similar properties).  “It means they do not have 
a clue about what loo ks 
good, what is quality, what 
is in style, is desirable. 
Usually they like gaudy 
and tacky things that may 
be expensive but horrible 
looking.”  09.8%  
(22) 
--- Page 15 ---
 
          15 SHALLOW/EAS
Y A person who has bad taste is a 
person unable to make an effort 
to perceive and appreciate 
properties of works of art that 
are not immediately obvious OR 
is a person who stops at the 
surface of works of art, and thus 
only likes superficial things that 
are easy to appreciate.  “Attracted to things that 
have no depth.”  12.1%  
(27) 
Non-aesthetic properties of works of art  20.1%  
(45) 
HARMFUL  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things that are 
harmful, immoral or offensive.  “If someone finds humor 
by making fun of 
someone. If there is 
violence, or abuse.”  
 15.6%  
(35) 
DUMB  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things or 
people that are dumb or lack 
any epistemic value.  “Generally something 
dumb that can be 
apprecia ted by the lowest 
common denominator, is 
my best way of summing it 
up. This can also change 
depending on who is 
saying it.”  04.0%  
(9) 
CHEAP  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who likes things that are 
not expensive, or cheap.  “A person who has a bad 
taste is a person who likes 
ugly and cheap stuff. 
He/she likes to collect junk 
or dress ugly. For 
example, he wears jean 
and t -shirt to a wedding. 
Another example, she 
collects junk jewelry like 
fake ugly bracelet.”  02.2%  
(5) 
Others (agent -based)  22.8% 
(51) 
BAD DESIGNER  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who designs things or 
chooses compositions that are 
aesthetically unpleasant 
(clothes, decoration, etc.)  “Specific examples come 
to mind right away, of bad 
taste. In clothing, for 
example, a blouse, that 
combines plaid and 
stripes, anything with a 
leopard or snake print, or 
any clothing that lacks 12.1%  
(27) 
--- Page 16 ---
 
          16 modesty for the wearer. A 
person with bad taste, in 
my opinion, lacks the 
ability to create sometihng 
of beauty.”  
UNPLEASANT  A person who has bad taste is a 
person who is annoying to be 
around, either because they are 
rude, immodest, or loud or wear 
kitsch or garish clothes.  “bad taste to me is being 
unkempt in yourself. A lack 
of postivity which shows in 
almost everything a 
perso n does.”  
 11.6%  
(26) 
Table 2. Participants’ definitions of bad taste. The indications for the columns are the same 
as for Table 1.  
 
5.3. Demographic variations in participants’ definitions of taste  
 
Additionally, we looked at whether participants’ definitions of good and bad aesthetic tastes 
varied along with certain demographic variables: age, gender (coded as : 1 = man, 2 = 
woman), socio -economic status (measured through education levels for non -student 
participants, and education le vel of their parent with the highest education level for student 
participants), political orientation (from left to right), and frequency of engagement in art -
related activities. For each category of definition presented in Tables 3 and 4, we performed 
logistic regression with endorsement of category as dependent variable, and all five 
demographic variables as predictors. As can be seen, socioeconomic status or engagement 
with art did not seem to significantly impact participants’ choices.  
 
 DISTINCTION  SUBJECTIVISM  CONSENSUS  GENTLE  
Age 0.04 (0.01)  
β = 1.40***  -0.04 (0.01)  
β = -1.34**  -0.01 (0.01)  
β = -0.40 0.03 (0.02)  
β = 1.87  
Gender  -0.15 (0.33)  
β = -0.17 0.67 (0.34)  
β = 0.78*  -0.40 (0.39)  
β = -0.56 0.00 (0.61)  
β = 0.00  
Socio -economic  -0.17 (0.17)  
β = -0.38 -0.28 (0.17)  
β = -0.64 0.17 (0.20)  
β = 0.48  0.12 (0.32)  
β = 0.52  
Art-related 
practices  0.11 (0.37)  
β = 0.11  -0.70 (0.44)  
β = -0.70 -0.48 (0.48)  
β = -0.57 -1.02 (0.84)  
β = -1.95 
Political  0.05 (0.08)  
β = 0.27  0.02 (0.09)  
β = 0.08  0.05 (0.10)  
β = 0.24 0.19 (0.16)  
β = 1.55  
Table 3. Demographic predictors of participants’ definitions of good taste. For each category 
presented (DISTINCTION, SUBJECTIVISM, CONSENSUS and GENTLE), we performed a 
logistic regression with Age, Gender (1 = Man, 2 = Woman), Socio -economic status, 
Engagement in art -related practices, and Political orientation as predictors. Each cell presents 
the regression coefficient and the standard error on the first line, and the standardized 
regression coefficient (β) on the seco nd line.  
 
--- Page 17 ---
 
          17  
 RELATIVISM  DISSENSUS  NO VALUE  SHALLOW/EA
SY HARMFUL  
Age -0.01 (0.02)  
β = -0.77 -0.02 (0.01)  
β = -0.71 0.01 (0.01)  
β = 0.31  -0.01 (0.01)  
β = -0.72 0.02 (0.01)  
β = 0.78  
Gender  0.21 (0.57)  
β = 0.43  -0.25 (0.39)  
β = -0.35 0.30 (0.31)  
β = 0.33  -0.81 (0.45)  
β = -1.23°  0.37 (0.39)  
β = 0.51  
Socio -
economic  -0.26 (0.29)  
β = -1.03 -0.16 (0.19)  
β = -0.43 -0.04 (0.16)  
β = -0.09 0.15 (0.22)  
β = 0.46  0.08 (0.20)  
β = 0.23  
Art 
engagement  -0.39 (0.72)  
β = -0.69 -0.61 (0.49)  
β = -0.73 -0.26 (0.37)  
β = -0.24 0.86 (0.48)  
β = 1.14°  -0.28 (0.46)  
β = -0.33 
Political  0.10 (0.15)  
β = 0.79  0.02 (0.10)  
β = 0.11  -0.13 (0.08)  
β = -0.52 -0.32 (0.14)  
β = -1.84*  -0.16 (0.11)  
β = -0.83 
Table 4. Demographic predictors of participants’ definitions of bad taste. The indications for 
the columns are the same as for table 3.  
 
5.4. Discussion  
 
What lesson can be drawn from these results regarding the folk concept of taste? Most of ou r 
participants (93%) agreed to say that they considered that certain people had better  aesthetic 
taste than others. This confirms that the notions of good and bad aesthetic taste are part of 
our everyday aesthetic lives. But what exactly do people mean by ‘good’ and ‘bad’ aesthetic 
tastes?  
 
(i) A first finding, which came as a surprise, was that, contrary to what is usually discussed in 
the philosophical literature (see Schellekens, 2009) , good t aste is not only associated with 
judgment, perception, or enjoyment, but also with an ability to create, compose, and design. 
About one in ten participants gave an answer falling into the DESIGNER (10.7%) or BAD 
DESIGNER (12.1%) category and considered tha t good taste comes with creative abilities 
such as selecting clothing items that fit together, arranging a living room harmoniously, etc.  
 
--- Page 18 ---
 
          18  
Figure 1.  Percentage of participants’ definitions of good taste  falling into each category.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Percentage  of participants’ definitions of bad taste  falling into each category.  
 
(ii) Beyond this unexpected observation, a second finding was that participants’ definitions of 
good and bad aesthetic taste mirrored the kind of tension highlighted by Hume, illustrat ing the 
paradox of taste. On the subjective side, 25% of good taste definitions and 20.1% of bad taste 
definitions fell into the SUBJECTIVISM category, in which participants defined good and bad 
taste in reference to their own taste. At the same time, 25.9 % of good taste definitions and 
29% of bad taste definitions fell respectively into the DISTINCTION and NO VALUE 
categories, according to which having good taste is liking good art and/or being able to 
distinguish good from bad works of art, and having bad  taste is liking things that lack positive 
aesthetic values. Among participants whose definition of bad taste fell into the NO VALUE 
category, a third also fell into the GAUDY category, meaning that they considered that people 

--- Page 19 ---
 
          19 of bad taste enjoy objects th at instantiate negative properties which form a specific cluster 
including being gaudy, kitsch, or tacky.  
 It is worth noting that SUBJECTIVIST answers are not absolutely  incompatible with 
answers that fall into the DISTINCTION and NO VALUE categories, as shown by a participant 
who answered:  
 
When I say someone has bad taste I usually mean someone who thinks fast food is delicious, 
or someone who doesn't appreciate great dialog in a movie. I think bad taste is liking clothes 
that aren't classic -looking. But  it appears my perception of "bad taste" is solely my own opinion.3 
 
However, it is clear that answers in the DISTINCTION and NO VALUE categories easily lend 
themselves to an objectivist reading, according to which good taste is the ability to discriminat e 
the true aesthetic value of objects. Thus, the fact that participants’ answers are split between 
these categories and the SUBJECTIVISM one seems to speak in favor of the dichotomy Hume 
pointed out three centuries ago. The following answer perfectly illus trates this:  
 
Their taste aligns closely to mine, or is similar but “better” than mine. By “better,” I mean like 
disliking something I know (sort of objectively) is not that good (like laughing at a joke that’s so 
unfunny that it comes back around into bei ng funny again).  
 
Interestingly, while roughly the same percentage of good taste definitions fell into the 
DISTINCTION and SUBJECTIVISM categories (25.9 vs. 25%), there was a 9% gap between 
the NO VALUE and SUBJECTIVISM categories for bad taste definitions  (29.0 vs. 20.1%). This 
might reflect a tendency in participants to become more objectivist when focusing on the bad 
(rather than the good). Such a tendency has been observed in the past for moral objectivism 
(Beebe, 2014; Goodwin & Darley, 2010), though n ot for aesthetic objectivism (Cova & Pain, 
2012).  
 
(iii) Hume’s solution to this paradox of taste was to keep both subjectivity and objectivity by 
grounding the standard of taste in the opinion of experts. As one can see, this solution wasn’t 
favored by ou r participants: only 1.3% of participants considered that good taste is determined 
by the taste of EXPERTS. A much more popular position was that good taste is to be found in 
what is widely appreciated: 14.7% of good taste definitions fell into the CONSENS US 
category4 and 15.2% of bad taste definitions fell into the DISSENSUS category. This inclusive 
stance is in stark contrast with Hume’s elitist hypothesis, but it can be seen as another way to 
combine the mind -dependence of aesthetic properties with the existence of an objective 
standard of taste.5 
 
(iv) Burke’s contention that good taste is an active ability was well reflected by the proportion 
of bad taste definitions falling into the SHALLOW/EASY (12.1%) and FOLLOWERS (5.8%) 
 
3 The last sentence does not necessarily contradict the first because the participant may consider that 
expressions such as ‘delicious ‘ or ‘great dialogues ‘ mean something like ‘delicious for me ‘ or ‘great 
dialogue according to me ‘. 
4 Among the 33 participants who gave an answer in the CONSENSUS category, only 4 gave an answer 
that mentioned what philos ophers call the ‘test of time’.  
5 We classified as ‘experts’ people's reference to professionals of artistic domains. Hume was rather 
referring to ideal judges (see Levinson 2002 for an enlightening discussion). Since nearly nobody 
referred to judges, the difference between ideal or professional judges is not of great importance here.  
--- Page 20 ---
 
          20 categories. Indeed, th e definitions in both of these categories rely on the idea that people of 
bad taste indulge in effortless consumption and fail to put in the effort required by good taste. 
For example, when explaining how taste could be improved (see Section 7), one partic ipant 
even claimed that having a better taste is not a question of changing preferences, but a 
question of having experiences grounded in better experiences and judgment:  
 
Having new experiences in food, racing or sports exposes the individual to other pos sibilities.  
Once they can distinguish differences, their taste has been improved.  A change in taste may 
not reflect a change in preference.  
 
The definitions provided by these participants also fit well with the thesis that good 
taste is an Aristotelian v irtue since the latter requires continuous training (see notably Lopes 
2008; Goldie, 2008).  
 
(v) Finally, participants also appealed to moral considerations (e.g. whether one likes offensive 
works of art) to define good and bad taste. This was clearer for definitions of bad taste 
(HARMFUL: 15.6%) than for definitions of good taste (GENTLE: 5.4%). The difference 
between the two conditions is statistically significant: χ2(1) = 11.51, p < .001. This might reflect 
the fact that offensive works of art can be tal ked about as being in “bad taste,” while “good 
taste” doesn’t seem to have clear moral connotations. For example, in everyday life, we say 
that a morally dubious remark is in ‘bad taste’, but we wouldn’t say that a morally virtuous 
remark is in ‘good taste ’. This also suggests that liking what is morally bad can be a defeater 
for good taste although liking what is morally good isn’t sufficient for having good taste. Hume 
formulates a similar idea:  
 
Where vicious manners are described without being marked with the proper characters of 
blame and disapprobation this must be allowed to disfigure the poem and to be a real deformity. 
[H]owever I may excuse the poet, on account of the manners of his age, I never can relish the 
composition. (1757/1987, p.15 3) 
 
Participants with higher education (which we used as a proxy for socio -economic level) 
were not less likely to ground their definition of good and bad taste in moral considerations (in 
fact, they were even non -significantly more likely). Thus, our resu lts seem to conflict with 
Bourdieu’s claim that “popular classes” are more likely to blend aesthetic and moral 
judgments, in opposition with the ‘disinterested‘, the Kantian view that morality and aesthetics 
are orthogonal (1979/1984, p. 41). However, it s hould be stressed that Bourdieu focused on 
the (moral) content  of the work, while our participants more frequently referred to the works’ 
impact  on real -life individuals (and how they could be offended). This difference should be 
kept in mind while interpr eting our results.  
 
6. Good and bad taste across domains  
 
We have seen that most people think that there can be good and bad aesthetic taste, even if 
they do not all seem to mean the same things by these expressions. However, our initial 
question (Taste_Po ssibility) was restricted to works of art (even if participants didn’t 
necessarily take this restriction into account). This raises a question: do people think that the 
distinction between good and bad taste is specific to the artistic domain, or do they t hink that 
--- Page 21 ---
 
          21 it can be found in other domains as well? To find out, we presented participants with 19 
domains (beer, car races, clothing, comic books, food, graphic design, interior design, jewelry, 
literature, marijuana, movies, music, paintings, sculpture, sports, TV shows, video games, 
wine and wrestling) and asked them for each domain:  
 
1. To which extent it makes sense  to say that someone has good or bad taste in this 
domain (for one half of participants), or to distinguish  between good and bad tastes in 
this domain (for the other half) (on a scale from -3 = “No sense at all” to 3 = “Completely 
sense”).  
2. To which extent it is important  to have good taste in this domain (on a scale from 0 = 
“Not important at all” to 6 = “Extremely important”).  
3. To which extent t hey were knowledgeable  in this domain (on a scale from 0 = “Not 
knowledgeable at all” to 6 = “Very knowledgeable”).  
 
6.1 Participants’ answers on good and bad taste across domains  
 
Participants’ answers to these questions are organized by domain in Table 5 (standard 
deviation in parentheses). The rightmost column presents the result of an additional survey on 
42 French -speaking participants presented with the same list of domains and asked to rate to 
which extent each domain is generally considered a s “highbrow” (on a scale from 0 = 
“Completely disagree”  to 6 = “completely agree”). This survey was conducted to determine to 
what extent participants’ conceptions of taste track what counts as “highbrow”.  
 
Domain  Say Distinguish  Important  Knowledgea
ble Highbrow  
Beer  0.81 (1.89)  0.91 (1.76)  2.22 (2.05)  2.12 (1.89)  1.98 (1.32)  
Car races  -0.95 (1.85)  -1.00 (1.65)  0.85 (1.32)  0.77 (1.23)  1.26 (1.42)  
Clothing  2.05 (1.41)  2.07 (1.31)  4.23 (1.60)  3.24 (1.57)  3.12 (1.50)  
Comic books  0.59 (1.80)  0.43 (1.85)  1.82 (1.78)  1.51 (1.64)  1.90 (1.21)  
Food  1.75 (1.60)  1.76 (1.43)  4.15 (1.82)  4.05 (1.49)  3.48 (1.42)  
Graphic 
Design  1.70 (1.57)  1.58 (1.44)  3.46 (1.88)  2.19 (1.86)  3.79 (1.12)  
Interior 
Design  2.03 (1.45)  2.01 (1.18)  3.94 (1.79)  2.36 (1.73)  3.95 (1.43)  
Jewelry  1.61 (1.60)  1.61 (1.31)  3.12 (2.00)  2.15 (1.76)  4.00 (1.48)  
Literature  1.86 (1.57)  1.93 (1.34)  3.92 (1.81)  3.29 (1.73)  4.98 (1.07)  
Marijuana  -0.25 (2.09)  -0.28 (2.04)  1.51 (1.95)  1.53 (1.93)  0.90 (1.14)  
Movies  1.70 (1.62)  1.96 (1.21)  3.85 (1.70)  3.85 (1.50)  3.17 (1.21)  
--- Page 22 ---
 
          22 Music  1.96 (1.49)  2.14 (1.11)  4.27 (1.72)  3.98 (1.57)  3.83 (1.50)  
Paintings  1.74 (1.80)  1.86 (1.37)  3.68 (1.88)  2.47 (1.77)  4.64 (1.43)  
Sculpture  1.49 (1.63)  1.59 (1.39)  3.05 (2.06)  1.69 (1.59)  5.07 (1.22)  
Sports  -0.37 (1.94)  -0.26 (1.82)  1.59 (1.80)  2.04 (1.88)  1.88 (1.38)  
 
TV shows  1.38 (1.64)  1.73 (1.37)  3.49 (1.79)  3.63 (1.59)  1.38 (1.13)  
Video games  0.35 (1.99)  0.55 (2.00)  2.26 (2.08)  2.47 (2.09)  1.57 (1.17)  
Wine  1.48 (1.82)  1.46 (1.61)  2.91 (2.12)  1.89 (1.76)  4.48 (1.21)  
Wrestling  -0.94 (1.96)  -1.03 (1.78)  0.88 (1.52)  0.92 (1.56)  0.81 (1.06)  
Table 5. Means and SDs for participants to our four questions about domains ( say, distinguish, 
important, knowledgeable ). The rightmost column presents the results of an additional survey 
in which participants were asked to rate to what extent each domain is generally considered 
as “highbrow”.  
 
Because participants’ answers to the Say and Distinguish  question were closely 
aligned across domains: r(17) = .99, we merged them into a single score ( Taste ). Participants’ 
Taste  answers were significantly correlated with their answers to the Important  and 
Knowledgeable  questions: r(4577) = .64, r(4577) = .44. Participants’ answers to the Important  
and Knowledgeable  questions were also correlated: r(4577) = .59.  
Using domains rather than participants as data points, we also found a significant 
correlation between Taste  and Highbrow  answers: r(17) = .79. Partial correlations suggested  
that being knowledgeable in a domain and considering it as highbrow made independent 
contributions to the idea that there are good and bad tastes within this domain: r(17) = 0.80, 
r(17) = 0.83.  
 
6.2. Discussion  
 
(i) A first remark is that these participan ts thought that it makes sense to distinguish between 
good and bad taste in domains other than the artistic. This clashes with an interpretation of 
Kant according to which aesthetic judgments and judgments of the agreeable are restricted to 
specific domain s. Kant gave food and wine as examples of domains where we make 
judgments of the agreeable rather than aesthetic judgments (1790/1914, p.57 & p.158, see 
also Ginsborg, 2019, §2.1) – because such judgments usually involve a desire for the object, 
often don’ t purport to be universal judgments about which everyone ought to agree, and 
involve sense modalities (smell and taste) which don’t “permit contemplation” (Scruton, 2001, 
p.103) in contrast to hearing and sight. Contrary to this Kantian view, food and wine  scored 
highly on the Say, Distinguish , and Important questions.  
We may interpret this as suggesting that, contrary to what Kant claimed, common 
sense doesn’t treat judgments about beauty and art differently from judgments of the 
agreeable. Alternatively, it may be interpreted as suggesting that there are more domains, e.g. 
--- Page 23 ---
 
          23 food and wine, where aesthetic judgments are relevant than were indicated by Kant and some 
of his interpreters (however, see our next point).  
 
(ii) Because participants considered that i t doesn’t make sense to distinguish between good 
and bad taste in certain domains, these results seem to conflict with the appealing conjunction 
of two plausible ideas: (1) that domains where it makes sense to distinguish between good 
and bad taste are dom ains where we can adopt an aesthetic attitude, and (2) that we can 
adopt an aesthetic attitude toward any kind of object (Irvin 2008). If it doesn’t make sense to 
distinguish good and bad taste concerning, say, marijuana – as participants, on average, seem  
to think – either (1) or (2) should be rejected.  
 
(iii) As predicted by a popular hypothesis, participants’ conceptions of taste seemed driven by 
their knowledge of a given field. For example, the more people knew about comic books, video 
games or marijuana, the more they found it made sense to distinguish between good and bad 
taste in these domains (respectively: r = .41, .51, .43). However, knowledge didn’t explain 
everything: for example, participants were way more knowledgeable in Food than in I nterior 
Design and still answered that it made a bit more sense to distinguish between good and bad 
taste for Interior Design.  
 
(iv) Another factor might then be whether domains are considered as ‘highbrow’ or not. Indeed, 
the categories for which the Say and Distinguish scores are negative are considered as 
“lowbrow” ( Highbrow  average score below 2): wrestling, sport, marijuana, and car races. 
Furthermore, among the 13 domains in which participants usually didn’t consider themselves 
knowledgeable (those fo r which the average score for Knowledgeable  is below 3), the only 5 
where they tended to consider it important to distinguish between good and bad taste (average 
score for Important above 3) are domains that are considered highbrow: sculpture, painting, 
jewelry, interior design, and graphic design (average score for Highbrow  above 3).  
This result fits well with the Bourdieusian idea that it is more valuable to have good 
taste in domains that are associated with the dominant classes (highbrow domains) becaus e 
taste is often used to signal one’s social status.  
7. Can taste be improved? And how?  
 
Finally, we asked our participants whether people could improve their taste, relative to fine 
arts. 92.5% of participants answered positively. We then asked participan ts who answered 
positively to explain how people could improve their taste.  
After categories were created, all three coders independently went through 
participants’ answers and indicated for each answer in which categories this answer fell. FC 
coded all an swers and CB and SHD coded one half each. Inter -rater agreement was good 
(Cohen’s kappa = 0.68 [0.64, 0.73]). Remaining disagreements were settled by a third coder 
(CB or SHD, depending on the second coder’s identity). Final results are presented in Table 
6 (rightmost column).  
 
7.1 Participants’ answers to how taste can be improved  
 
--- Page 24 ---
 
          24 Category  Method to improve  Example  % 
Exposure  66.4%  
(148)  
VARIETY  Expose oneself to a wide variety 
of works of art (by travelling, 
etc.).  “They can improve their 
tastes by starting to value 
new things. I haven't 
always liked the same 
things but over time my 
taste has become more 
refined. Anyone can do 
that. It's not something you 
are born with.”  
 40.4%  
(90) 
AGAINST  Go against oneself by trying 
things one does not like, or b y 
going out of one’s comfort zone 
and trying unusual things (e.g. 
things that are not mainstream).  “People can improve their 
taste by giving chances to 
art that is not their go -to 
piece. For instance, listen 
to a genre of music you are 
not familiar with or  
ordinarily do not like but 
instead try to find the 
beauty/harmony in it.”  10.8%  
(24) 
QUALITY  Expose oneself to or acquaint 
oneself with things that are 
high-quality OR are considered 
high-quality by most people 
and/or critics.  “By choosing specific 
topics within a given 
subject that are 
considered good. For 
example, one can improve 
their taste in music by 
listening to bands and 
artists that are considered 
good. Not forcing 
themselves to like it, 
however.”  
 17.5%  
(39) 
CONFORMITY  Try to imitate the taste of the 
majority, or of one’s ingroups.  “People should know what 
is accepted as good by 
most of the people and try 
to stick with such good 
things to improve their 
taste.”  06.3%  
(14) 
EMULATION  Try to imitate the taste of 
experts and role models.  “By educating themselves 
and mirroring behaviors of 
those with good taste.”  08.5%  
(19) 
Knowledge  41.7%  
(93) 
--- Page 25 ---
 
          25 BACKGROUND 
KNOWLEDGE  Acquire factual knowledge 
about works of art and their 
creator (by reading, getting an 
education, etc.).  “Finding out more about a 
subject will improve a 
person's taste. Like 
reading a book about 
movies or taking a class 
will help a person to 
understand what makes a 
movie good or bad.”  36.8%  
(82) 
DISCUSS  Discuss taste with others, try to 
understand others’ taste, ask 
others to explain their taste.  “Consumption is very 
important, it helps people 
gain perspective, 
discussing with others the 
strong and weak points of 
a given work is also very 
important”  06.3%  
(14) 
EXPLAIN  Learn to explain an d/or justify 
one’s preferences and tastes.  “People can improve their 
taste by being reflective on 
something they enjoyed. It 
is easy to think "wow that 
was good" but to think 
back and pick apart why 
you liked or did not like 
something is the path to 
refini ng your taste”  02.7%  
(6) 
Skills (Know -how)  04.5%  
(10) 
PERCEPTION  Learn to pay attention to and 
perceive more details, learn to 
adopt new perspectives on 
works of art.  “I think just being able to 
pay more attention to the 
subtle details in those 
areas can actually elevate 
a person's perception of 
things.”  04.5%  
(10) 
Others  07.6%  
(17) 
AGE  Taste changes during one’s life.  “as people age, their 
preferences and choices 
changes and it leads to 
betterment most of the 
time.”  02.7%  
(6) 
RELATIVISM  Someone’s taste becomes 
‘good’ when it coincides with the 
participant’s taste.  “If someone begins to 
have similar opinions to 
me on a form of 
entertainment then I would 
say that they can improve 
their taste”  02.2%  
(5) 
--- Page 26 ---
 
          26 DESIGN  Learn to compose ae sthetically 
pleasant things (e.g. 
coordinating clothes, colors, or 
sounds).  “Often people are unaware 
that certain qualities of an 
object enhance or detract 
from the surrounding 
objects. Once they have a 
few examples of how 
objects and colors can 
work with  or against each 
other, they are freer to 
experiment and find 
combinations that are 
more pleasing to them and 
others. This is sometimes 
seen when people are 
given a course in choosing 
clothes.”  02.7%  
(6) 
Table 6. Participants’ methods to improve taste. The indications for the columns are the same 
as for Table 1.  
 
7.2 Discussion  
 
As we saw, most participants answered that people can improve their taste, which is in line 
with the fact that most participants admitted making a distinction between good  and bad taste.  
 
(i) 55.6% of those who thought that people cannot improve their taste (7.5% of all participants) 
considered that this is not possible because taste is relative and/or is akin to subjective 
preferences - due to space constraints, we do not produce the table; all materials and data 
can be found at osf.io/ckx2z/ .6 Another common answer as to why people cannot improve 
their taste is that it is somehow too hard to change one’s taste (NO CHANGE, 27.8%), due to 
a lack of motivation (NO MOTIVATION, 16.7%) or to habits or difficulties in modyfining 
preferences and belief s:  
 
I believe people already have in them what they like and what they are accustomed to . It's very 
hard to change adults for their beliefs and training .  
 
(ii) 40.4% of participants considered that we can improve our taste by being exposed to a 
variety o f objects, genres, experiences, etc. This intuition was shared by Hume and Burke. 
Quite often (17.5%), participants explicitly specify that one needs to be exposed to high -quality 
objects and experiences, such as high art, masterpieces, or just Beauty (as in the following 
Kantian -ish example):  
 
People could improve their taste in fine art by being exposed to more of the beauty of God's 
creation...mountains, sunrises and sunsets, trees, etc.  
 
 
6 Note however that some who think that taste is subjective believe that we can nevertheless improve 
our taste, as the following example shows: “ People can continue to expose  themselves to arts and 
design. Over time the person should develop what they think is a pleasing style. This should improve 
their taste. ” 
--- Page 27 ---
 
          27 Additionally, it is interesting to note that our participants’ emphasis on diversity is in line with 
the results of a recent sociological study that highlight the fact that, nowadays, high -status 
tastes are characterized by a greater diversity and inclusivity at the level of genres (while still 
being cha racterized by a narrower focus on “high -quality” items within each genre) (Childress 
et al., 2021). Thus, it might be that participants’ conceptions of the best ways to improve one’s 
aesthetic taste are driven by the models offered by contemporary high -status tastes.  
 
(iii) 41.7% of participants gave an answer that we categorized as involving the  acquisition of 
some kind of knowledge (see the BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE, DISCUSS and EXPLAIN 
categories). According to these participants, we can improve our taste by improving our 
cognitive capacities and by learning from books and discussions with others. These answers 
are in line with Burke’s contention that taste is akin to judgment, in contrast to mere passive 
perception.  
Nevertheless, as we saw in section 5, only 4% of participants’ definitions of good taste 
were classified as BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE and 4.9% as INTELLECTUAL. Aesthetic 
taste is rarely defined in cognitive terms. This seems to be in tension with a strict reading of 
Burke’s view that taste is a kind of judgment, but it is not incompatible with a more moderate 
interpretation of his ideas, e.g. Carroll’s (1984) Burkian hypothesis that cognition plays a 
central role in aesthetic enjoyment and taste.  
 
8. Conclusion  
 
In this paper, our goal was to explore the  everyday concept of aesthetic taste with the aim of 
improving our grasp of what people mean when they distinguish between 'good' and 'bad' 
aesthetic taste. A first result was that most of our participants (drawn from a stratified US 
sample) indeed made su ch a distinction and considered that people could improve their 
aesthetic taste.  
 However, this apparent uniformity hides a wide variety of definitions of good and bad 
aesthetic taste. Though a variety in expression (i.e., definitions given) does not neces sarily 
reflect variety in the underlying construct (i.e., the folk concept of aesthetic taste), participants’ 
answers seem torn between the idea that taste is merely a matter of personal preference and 
the idea that taste is an ability to discriminate the true value of aesthetic objects. Between 20 
and 25% of participants gave a subjectivist answer according to which taste is a mere 
preference that differs from one person to another, while 25 to 29% of participants defined 
good and bad taste as the ability or inability to appreciate what is really aesthetically valuable. 
This tension reflects Hume’s paradox of taste, which we described in the introduction.  
 Our results suggest that our participants see good taste as something that is actively 
developed, whi le bad taste is passively absorbed. While our participants do not necessarily 
think that having good taste requires going against the consensus – quite the contrary, as 
many answers fell into the CONSENSUS or DISSENSUS categories – various participants 
stressed that good taste has to be autonomously and consciously developed, making the 
person with good taste able to explain and justify their preferences. This is in line with Burke 
and Carroll’s claims that taste, like judgment, has to be actively exercised  to be improved.  
 Most participants answered that improving one’s taste required exposing oneself to a 
wide and diverse array of works of art and/or acquiring factual knowledge about works of art. 
This might reflect that, even if taste is simply a preferen ce, some preferences are better 
--- Page 28 ---
 
          28 because they are more informed and the product of better judgment. To come back to the 
metaphor of gustatory taste ( pace Kant), one could say that taste as preference is subjective, 
but that it is better when it is grounded in an accurate ability to distinguish between the 
ingredients of a plate. This might also explain why people tend to think that it makes more 
sense to distinguish between good and bad taste for domains about which they have more 
knowledge: because their kn owledge makes them more conscious of the quantity of 
knowledge required to fully appreciate an object. Nevertheless, people also seemed to 
attribute an importance to mastering good taste in domains about which they are not 
knowledgeable but considered soci ally highbrow - which is close to Bourdieu’s hypothesis.     
 
Going back to our initial question of whether people are implicitly aesthetic objectivists, 
what can be learned from our results? First, it is indeed hard to deny that people do distinguish 
betw een good and bad taste. However, as we saw, this is not always incompatible with 
subjectivism about aesthetic properties: many participants simply defined good taste as taste 
similar to theirs or as taste in line with the consensus of the majority. Still, the high proportion 
of definitions assimilating good taste to the ability to discriminate and/or appreciate the true 
aesthetic values of works of art, and the fact that most people accept the idea that taste can 
be improved might reveal an objectivist stra in in laypeople’s views about aesthetic properties. 
This is a question that might need to be tackled more directly in future work.  
 Among other questions that might need to be addressed in the future, one is whether 
people who think of good taste as an abi lity to recognize what has true aesthetic value think 
that good judgment has to be accompanied by enjoyment to count as good taste. What about 
someone who is able to recognize good art after a lot of training, but is unable to enjoy and 
appreciate it? Does  this person have good taste? Does good taste necessarily include an 
affective component?  
 Such are the questions we plan to address in future work. Meanwhile, we would like to 
conclude by pointing out the striking relevance of empiricists’ analyses of aes thetic taste. It is 
heartening to note that aesthetic intuitions that are more than 260 years old have not drastically 
shifted. Hence, classical philosophers are not merely confined to history classes but can 
participate actively in contemporary debates. W hile the question of good taste is little 
discussed in philosophy (if not reduced to being merely subjective), both Hume and common 
sense show us that on taste, there is much to debate.  
 
References  
 
Beebe, J. R. (2014). How different kinds of disagreement impact folk metaethical judgments. 
In J. C. Wright, & H. Sarkissian (Eds.), Advances in experimental moral psychology: Affect, 
character, and commitments  (pp. 167 –178). London: Bloomsbury.  
 
Beebe, J. R., & Sackris, D. (2016). Moral objectivism across the l ifespan. Philosophical 
Psychology , 29(6), 912 -929. 
 
Beebe, J., Qiaoan, R., Wysocki, T., & Endara, M. A. (2015). Moral objectivism in cross -cultural 
perspective. Journal of Cognition and Culture , 15(3-4), 386 -401. 
 
--- Page 29 ---
 
          29 Bourdieu, P. (1979/1984). Distinction: A social critique of the judgement of taste  (R. Nice, 
Trans.). Harvard University Press.  
Burke, E. (1757/1998). A philosophical enquiry into the origin of our ideas of the sublime and 
beautiful  (A. Phillips, Ed.; Reiss). Oxford University Press.  
Carroll, N. (1984). Hume’s Standard of Taste. The Jou rnal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 
43(2), 181 –194. 
Childress, C., Baumann, S., Rawlings, C. M., & Nault, J. F. (2021). Genres, Objects, and the 
Contemporary Expression of Higher -Status Tastes. Sociological Science , 8, 230 -264.  
Cova, F. (2018). Beyond i ntersubjective validity: recent empirical investigations into the nature 
of aesthetic judgment. In F. Cova & S. Réhault, Advances in Experimental Philosophy of 
Aesthetics  (pp. 13 -32). Bloomsbury Publishing.  
 
Cova, F., & Pain, N. (2012). Can folk aesthetics  ground aesthetic realism? The Monist , 95(2), 
241-263. 
 
Cova, F., & Réhault, S. (2018). Advances in Experimental Philosophy of Aesthetics . 
Bloomsbury Publishing.  
 
Cova, F., Garcia, A., & Liao, S. Y. (2015). Experimental philosophy of aesthetics. Philosophy  
Compass , 10(12), 927 -939. 
 
Cova, F., Olivola, C. Y., Machery, E., Stich, S., Rose, D., Alai, M., ... & Zhu, J. (2019). De 
Pulchritudine non est Disputandum ? A cross ‐cultural investigation of the alleged 
intersubjective validity of aesthetic judgment. Mind  & Language , 34(3), 317 -338. 
 
Ginsborg, H. (2019). Kant’s Aesthetics and Teleology. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy  (Winter 2019). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2019/entries/kant -aesthetics/  
Goffin, K., & Cova, F. (2019). An empirical investigation of guilty pleasures. Philosophical 
Psychology , 32(7), 1129 -1155.  
 
Goldie, P. (2008). Virt ues of Art and Human Well -Being. Aristotelian Society Supplementary 
Volume , 82(1), 179 –195. 
 
Goodwin, G. P., & Darley, J. M. (2008). The psychology of meta -ethics: Exploring objectivism. 
Cognition , 106(3), 1339 -1366.  
 
Goodwin, G. P., & Darley, J. M. (2010) . The perceived objectivity of ethical beliefs: 
Psychological findings and implications for public policy. Review of Philosophy and 
Psychology,  1(2), 161 –188 
 
Goodwin, G. P., & Darley, J. M. (2012). Why are some moral beliefs perceived to be more 
objective  than others? Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 48(1), 250 -256. 
--- Page 30 ---
 
          30  
Hume, D. (1757/1987). Essays, moral, political, and literary  (E. F. Miller, Ed.; Rev. ed). Liberty 
Classics.  
Hutcheson, F. (1727/2008). An inquiry into the original of our ideas of beauty and virtue: In 
two treatises  (W. Leidhold, Ed.; Rev. ed). Liberty Fund.  
Irvin, S. (2008). The Pervasiveness of the Aesthetic in Ordinary Experience. The British 
Journal of Aesthetics , 48(1), 29 –44. 
Kant, I. (1790/1914). The Critique of the Power Judgement  (Bernard, Trans). Macmillan.  
Korsmeyer, C. (2013). Taste. In B. Gaut and D.M. Lopes. The Routledge Companion to 
Aesthetics .. New York: Routledge, 2001. 193 –202. 
 
Levinson, J. (2002). Hume’s Standard of Taste: The Real Problem. The Journal o f Aesthetics 
and Art Criticism , 60(3), 227 –238. 
Lizardo, O. (2014). Taste and the Logic of Practice in Distinction. Czech Sociological Review , 
50(3), 335 –364. 
Lopes, D. M. (2008). Virtues of Art: Good Taste. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
Supplem entary Volumes , 82, 197 –211. 
Moss, D., & Bush, L. S. (2021). Measuring metaaesthetics: Challenges and ways forward. 
New Ideas in Psychology , 62, 100866.  
 
Mothersill, M. (1989). Hume and the paradox of taste. In G. Dickie (Ed.), Aesthetics: A Critical 
Antho logy (pp. 269 –286). St. Martin’s.  
Murray, D. (2020). Maggots Are Delicious, Sunsets Hideous: False, or Do You Just Disagree? 
Data on Truth Relativism about Judgments of Personal Taste and Aesthetics. In T. Lombrozo, 
J. Knobe & S. Nichols (Eds.), Oxford Stu dies in Experimental Philosophy Volume 3  (pp. 64 -
96). Oxford University Press.  
 
Rabb, N., Han, A., Nebeker, L., & Winner, E. (2020). Expressivist to the core: Metaaesthetic 
subjectivism is stable and robust. New Ideas in Psychology , 57, 100760.  
 
Schelleken s, E. (2009). Taste and Objectivity: The Emergence of the Concept of the Aesthetic. 
Philosophy Compass , 4(5), 734 –743 
 
Scruton, R. (2001). Kant: A Very Short Introduction  (Revised). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.  
Zangwill, N. (2018). Beauty and the agree able: A critique of experimental aesthetics. In F. 
Cova & S. Réhault, Advances in Experimental Philosophy of Aesthetics  (pp. 289 -308). 
Bloomsbury Publishing.  